ask me for anything
nice
consider it okay
so thank you very much for coming it's
really honored to have you here
and i just want to say that david would
be amazingly
really happy that you come and
yeah
so
i'm
forwarding to
to andres now
nothing
sorry i think we were uh we would start
with steve and then i would come in
please
sounds good yeah i'll start
um just like what nico was saying it it
really it's it's truly an honor to be
able to to introduce professor keith
hart who i like to think of as the man
who saved david graber from the united
states of america
and more specifically from yale
university because he helped bring him
across the pond and set him up with a
position at goldsmiths where he was able
to continue with his overtly political
project that was much too political for
the academy in this country
the way he was blacklisted out of out of
higher education so i mean in many ways
we have professor hart to thank for um
for david graber's continued
uh productivity
um and i wanted to talk uh just
for a moment about the connections uh
between the two both personal and and
intellectual the the personal i've sort
of established
um keith hart has published a very
informative obituary that he wrote uh
for david where he talks about uh coming
into contact
through
shared a shared familiarity with marcel
moses work
and
the beginnings of what was a very
fruitful intellectual
collaboration that he mentions that that
there were some sort of political
grumblings that kind of interfered but
that
that really he considered david to be
his uh fiercest intellectual
uh companion and interlocutor
there are so many
areas where where their work resonates
where the the connection that that david
made
is so
um
profound and so rich
be it from
from uh keith hart's ideas about about
how money is constituted how it's a
memory bank
uh to the idea about the about human
economy that that in order to really
think about
economies we have to think of these as
as human systems and that's what really
i think connects their work
is their
their um assertion from the start that
all anthropology is inherently political
because all human action
is inherently
political
what i especially love about about keith
hart's own work is that he like like
david has shown
the errors of the ways that
anthropologists took
into
turning anthropology into a disciplined
connected to the
bureaucrat bureaucratizing
uh regime that is uh
uh
modernism and so anthropology became
complicit in its own
colonial project and that
nonetheless
anthropology when used
appropriately and personally rather than
impersonally that it's able to really
make the kinds of epiphanies and
revelations
that that david has so famously said
once you've seen them there's no really
unseeing them and so we we have keith
hart to thank
for helping david
see
these important epiphanies
and
uh helping be one of the many giants
who led david to believe that
scholarship is anything but the monastic
self it really is the collective
unconscious of the collective mind being
played out in these materialized ways
i want to now hand it over to andres
who's going to continue
thank you steve thank you for this uh
introduction and for contextualizing the
relationship of
of professor kit hart and and david
greber
and uh i would just like to sort of
introduce myself as well and uh to
inform that i don't belong to the field
of anthropology and
have happened and then entered into
encountered david in a very particular
way and especially in 2020
when he passed away we met with nika
in venice where i was living at the time
and then
ever since i was involved in the events
of
the museum of care and then
i keep on returning and contributing uh
with
great pleasure and always it's a context
where you can encounter new people new
ideas and
which
sort of continues the legacy of david
greber in this online format for the
moment
last year together with my colleagues
from milan during the pandemic my
students actually which were
we invented a fake department
within the school where i teach which
was called critical studies department
and together with the students we
started to reflect upon
the issues um
that we're dealing with education and we
created this kind of
an interesting independent learning
research networking platform and tool
for students
um that
everyone
was able to use
and
we were invited to create a
project
within the museum of care which was
entitled education and empty
institutions and with this talk we would
also launch the continuation of this
project and the program of 2022 and 23.
i'm very happy that this is once again
hosted by the museum of care
and
and i think the idea of hosting is
something that
some of my colleagues curators have been
using this idea of para hosting so i
hope museum of care will also become a
kind of for a hosting institution
hosting different kind of interesting
experiences
very delighted and a little bit nervous
as well uh to have the chance to present
uh keith hart who is a illustrious and
and very prominent and and fantastic uh
first guest uh very happy to do that
actually and then i was very very
delighted and happy to to read your book
and then to really
follow that particularly fascinating
story so uh it would be very difficult
to to give a sort of a short biography
of keet heart because it it goes or it
exceeds all all kind of conventions i
can say just that
githart is
now recognized as an anthropologist but
he comes from the background of
classical studies as we heard in the
very very beginning when we were
chatting
so
then
he has
lived in 24 different countries he has
done a lot of different field work
uh starting from ghana where uh
you have
done a field work on informal economies
and as he claims he has become a
smuggler himself he's been a gambler
consultant
self-taught economist
[Music]
marxist for a while and and i could
continue and go on and go
continue really
with with this very kind of
unconventional and unorthodox biography
due to his
numerous places where keith has lived he
frequently
uh sort of self denominates or herself
defines himself to be a nomad at least
in his early career and then most
recently he is grounded in paris france
and then durban and south africa he
continues to focus on his writing
he's still lecturing and among many
places also in london
at the london school of economics
and
we will talk today uh
about uh most recent project or the book
self in the world connecting life's
extremes
and i have preferred uh two little
questions and a little quote before we
maybe we can start from here
uh so uh keith hart is also known for
having coined different terms or
different kind of concepts
that of
informal economy and human economy
you've contributed also on and created
this idea of memory bank
you've contributed money and and many
kind of
[Music]
inter-disciplinary terms that you have
invented and once i remember in milan uh
mark augie was saying that
[Music]
it is important like
he coined the term uh which
was called not known places or no places
and he said he just
mentioned the symptom that he sort of
um
detected uh in in in the social
dimension and he just named it at the
right time
uh so i was wondering how uh in today's
presentation's title is lifelong
self-learning and modern education
so that's where we return to education
like you have contributed in many
subjects i was interested how um
have you came to this and then
in your book self in the world
connecting life's extremes uh it is a
very particular autobiographical work uh
that sort of
it is a travel
uh from the manchester where you come
from
uh up to uh to the place and then and
where you find yourself today and just
like geographically but also mentally it
is also a kind of uh declaration and
actually illustration of all the
references or
intellectual kind of contaminations uh
of of your particular path
and uh i would maybe like to open uh you
in your book in the in the in
introduction you say that most
anthropologists discover the world by
finding out
what people do and think where they live
i rely mainly on lifelong learning
through reading writing and varied work
experience that includes eclectic
immersion in high and low culture i
combine auto ethnography
with world history and humanist
philosophy i teach what i have learned
and i learn from teaching
so maybe we can start from there and and
then i have some other quotes and maybe
then we could sort of continue this
dialogue afterwards and i remember that
in a recent or not so recent lecture at
the goldsmiths he also said that you see
yourself engaged in discussion
of how to make this world a better place
which is a discussion
that is going on at least for the last 1
000 years and that has many very
prominent kind of
participants so um can we speak about
your book and i would pass it forward to
you
keith
and sorry if the introduction has been
too long or too confused but
i hope we can start from here and really
revisit what your latest book speaks
about
thank you um
well i can't
start my lecture by
answering your questions because that
wasn't where i planned to start
um
but
i just want to say that
to pick up something that stephen
pointed out that
as i said in my out obituary the the
relationship i had with david is quite
greater in my life than any other
and it lasted for 15 or 16 years
and when he died it took me quite a
while to recover because
we we got
we fell out when i had a three-year
appointment to lse
when i was actually getting treatment
for cancer and still trying to lecture
and there was
there was a strike
and i asked everybody
is this real was it important and almost
everybody said oh no nobody cares about
this strike it's just the formality
so and then i i so i gave my lecture and
david then broadcast around
the internet that i was a scab
and i found it pretty hard to
to accept this as a gesture of
friendship he said i'm a union i come
from a union family and i said well
i come from a family where you don't
trash your friends
so
so that led to a certain estrangement
and uh
and and of course when he died i i just
was
shattered by the thought that this
wonderful relationship we had for so
long and learned so much from each of us
i mean i don't think you could count you
know who got more out of it i mean i
don't know how much he got out of it i
know it was bad a lot and i know that it
was the absolute making of my new life
after i moved to paris away from
cambridge and had no institutional
support
and
and david was my institutional support
and and i it's so common it's like
family really you know you end up you
know uh
you know slagging somebody off over the
sunday dinner and not talking to them
for 10 years or something like that and
uh
that's what i had to come with you know
that that i'd wasted you know
several years
not continuing this relationship so
it wasn't is the most important
intellectual relationship that i had and
and it actually provided
the means of
adjusting to a situation in which i had
no institutional existence living in a
country that didn't want to know me
and david was my principle of support
and and continuity in that period
okay so my title self in the world and
uh subtitle connecting live set streams
comes from the fact that
i think we learn uh
in the social sciences especially
how we're all divided and and separated
we're separated by
race and religion and class and gender
and nation and god knows how many other
ways
and it's true that these divisions these
socially institutional divisions
mediate between ourselves and the world
we live in
they are you know the way we connect
with it most of the time
but uh you know in in in
i think in the process
we never discuss what is the self and
what is the world i mean never mind what
is the how can we make the relationship
between the two
and i think this is and so
uh that's what i'm trying to do is to to
reinvent something like the the golden
mean of the greeks
which is to say if you have you know
uh
dialectical pairs like rights and wrongs
and true and false and all the rest of
it
it's really
dangerous and bad to get stuck on one
pole of the pair and ignore or negate
the other
you have to find the best combination of
them that suits you and
your political and personal purposes
so uh
i mean that's in fact the the african
novelist chinook
in his probably greatest novel
things fall apart and well he actually
has a an autobiography called a british
protected child the education of a
british and he says
that the evil is people
uh
seek the uh uh the middle ground always
which is the same idea was the old greek
one
and the poles are basically inhabited by
the fanatics and our huma who deny our
humanity human humanity that we find
in the middle ground in in particular
combinations perhaps opportunistic or
principled
uh but they always involve both sides
and so what i wanted to do was to write
about how i suggested that you know that
we enter two journeys in our life
uh out into the world and enter
and of course they're related they're
actually completely interdependent but
uh we uh we lack uh
much in the way of education for
building up our own version of how
they're connected
and if we and i wrote my book really
with readers in mind to
uh uh uh
the end if i knew that i would my
readers would be me of many different
kinds some more academic some with no
academic training at all
and uh
you know i i
so i wrote it and then the introduction
explained that i don't expect you to
read this from start to the end i mean
some of you will be more interested in
the kind of intellectual part
you just you just went mute keith
yeah you're just
not waving my hands i always wave my
hands too much
and so
you know i mean i wrote nine versions of
this book in five years
and every time i wrote another one it
was because i hadn't resolved
the
synthesis of of of the pair since i was
trying to connect effectively to an
audience as dispersed and wide as i it's
hoped for
and
okay
uh
my main
argument is
that humanity that i being human is not
written into our dna it's something
that we have to uh
uh become if we can or uh
but the unequal society which
essentially
is synonymous with the last 5 000 years
of human history
and ours is a particularly unpleasant
version of it
uh
unequal society it means that we are
alienated from our humanity from the
world from each other and even from
ourselves
we feel puny isolated
self in a vast unknowable and
universe
and uh you know we we
the results is you know as a result of
living in an equal society
of any kind you know the racist empire
or capitalists class systems or whatever
or gender
and saginaw
we are in fact inevitably part human and
not wholly human so it's really a bit of
a stretch to claim that we're already
human
we are neither individually yet human
nor
have we yet as a collective as humanity
discovered the means of being human and
in my view you know we can only aspire
to be human
if self and society or self and the
world reinforce each other and there are
societies that have achieved this more
effectively than than ours but i know
that most of my readers are going to be
trapped in the
in in in in a form of alienation that
they don't understand which is why
if i say david is my uh
has been my most
powerful interlocutor
there is no one in all my reading who
has given me as much as marx
you know because that's his question you
know we
i mean we live in societies where money
buys the machines and dominates the
people through both of these and
we need to reverse it so that people you
know have machines that work for them
and if necessary the money they need to
achieve what they want you know that but
we're still you know very far from
achieving forms of society
and i'm convinced you know that our uh
bureaucratized university education
makes it impossible for us to even
understand the world never mind feel
like belonging to it in fact most people
are in in in many many and more people
all the time want to escape from a world
that they feel is a threat to them
uh so so this is the this is more or
less the motivation
for uh writing the book the way that i
did
and of course at the center of it
especially if i'm thinking about
individual readers
rather than
you know social organization
[Music]
and so on
i mean
uh i have to
you know i have to
make it possible for
individuals through my book
in ways that reflect them not me
can perhaps begin answering for
themselves some of the questions
that i have raised for myself i offer my
life story and what i think i've learned
about the world
in a way that i hope will be
uh
um
a resource
you know and it's so you know i mean i
so learning from my book is the points
of the book so education
is and of course i have learned more
than from any other exercise what i want
you to to find out i mean this book i
mean every major book that i've written
kind of colonizes the existential soup
which just swirls around me in an
unformed way brings it out not just for
other people but more than anybody else
for me you know i when i wrote the
memory bank
you know i felt that i colonized ten
percent of the soup
i brought it out
and uh and
so so so uh
the question i believe
that my book
the the point of education and my
emphasis on lifelong self learning is
how can we resist alienation
and the people
that i have learned most from are people
who believe
that despite the terrible handicaps
under which people have always lived
there is a redemptive possibility
i mean when you know fanon can say you
know i believe that
people who have been enslaved and
colonized can actually
get rid of it and make something of
their own you know and so did marx that
was and angles that was the whole point
and uh i don't think anthropologists
accept you know a few individuals of
which david i think has been the most
successful
uh even
posed this question anymore
okay
so the centrality uh education
especially in self-learning
is is is is is if not you know
explicitly the theme of the book it
it's something that i approach again in
the last chapter to try and bring
together you know what i think how i
think i can do that
but also in you know i mean i've learned
from many sources i've learned from
a really
amazing collection of people who wrote
about themselves in the last 500 years
and i've learned
especially from the 18th century
enlightenment from zeke of
vico and russo and kant and from some of
the great founders
of the modernist period like rivers and
marcel mose
but the people i've learned most from in
the last
30 years or so are the anti-colonial
intellectuals i mean these people
i deal specifically with three
pan-africanists two boys james
and fennel and gandhi who i
know is going through a bad patch in
terms of public esteem at the moment
especially in india and south africa but
i i you know my attitude to reading is
you take out of somebody's life and work
what you want
the point about the anti-colonial
intellectuals and i think gandhi was the
greatest of them in a practical sense
is that they have to imagine a
post-racial imperialist society what
what we have to create a notion of think
of another world which is not racist and
not imperial
and then they have to arrange for
from the masses to fight for it
but also they have to show them that if
they're gonna fight effectively they
have to re-educate themselves
so that all the greatest of these
intellectuals were very concerned
with helping people to define their own
place in the revolution
as well as articulating what it was for
and and and how
you know the massive indian peasants
could somehow get their act together to
achieve it and get the british out
you know so
uh the anti-colonial intellectuals and
especially the people i just mentioned
it seems to me i mean
in my view the anti-colonial revolution
was the most important event of the 20th
century
it was catalyzed by two world wars
and it was the means through which
people brought into a european dominated
world society against their will in this
in the 19th century asserted their right
to establish their own relationship to
it in the 20th fashion concern there was
nothing else
that we achieved in that century which
was in fact a pretty terrible one
than that
so uh
this is
uh
you know i mean i think we if we i mean
we need to know where to look
you know in order to learn not by book
you know it's a small thing but
i mean who should you know who are the
people who really made a difference in
this struggle should we read and why
and that's partly what my book is about
you don't want to point people to a
whole range of
of inspirations for a better world who
actually did something so you can
find out from seeing what they did and
how and thought
you know and maybe you can connect with
that in new ways that help you to feel
more confident about your part of this
historical process
so uh
that's my uh
how how long have i gone by the way i
mean how long have i got left
no way
i think you
yeah we can go on it's 7 37 so it's it's
no i mean i don't want to know i know
the time i want to know you know when
you're going gonna start waving you're
flat saying shut up
at least ten minutes more
ten minutes
at least
oh come on okay all right
okay so what is modern education it's
based on two principles
which is what i call the holes and
bucket which is
forget who you are forget that you might
even bring anything that you already
know into this process we're just going
to you know fill your bucket with you
with the hose that we control
uh and and as a result of this you will
you know be
a good passive worker consumer and
citizen for the rest of your life
you know because the point of education
is to keep people quiet right
i mean
no even schooling isn't
you know and during the pandemic i kept
asking myself
is schooling you know to teach kids or
just to allow parents to work
and uh you know i mean
so so you know we we have to
kind of uh
so that's the first thing i mean it's
the denial of self
a person
and and and in organizations which uh
basically they had to suit the teachers
not the students
and to turn students into
you know fragmented and narrow
and passive
uh uh
subjects
uh the second the most you know is is
the and which i think is incredibly
crazy
is what paulo ferry called the banking
system of school
which is that you're you're supposed to
get your education before you're even a
grown-up
and that's supposed to do you throughout
the time that you're a grown-up
but the worst thing of all
is that in our capitalist education
systems bureaucratic capitalism you must
say
kids are brought up believing that
they're in an endless competition with
people of their own age
and that you know i mean you know they
must always compare themselves or will
be compared
in ways you know to suggest whether
they're going to win or not
i mean it's just so ridiculous i mean in
in ghana you know
in
the countryside
you might have a compound with 50 kids
and they're all out underneath the bell
book tree and you know
three-year-old a three-year-old will
play with an eight-year-old and
and the eight-year-old can behave like a
baby
you know and the bad the kick that the
baby can think about what it might be
like to be an adult
but i mean there's never any sense you
know that a cohort of people always
seven are in some deadly race for
survival
it's just awful
now
i have argued that universities
committed as part of the modern
revolution at the beginning of the last
century
to bureaucracize
capitalism and that's what makes modern
education modern is the idea that
people
[Music]
their knowledge should be fragmented
into narrow compartments and they the
longer they are given education the
narrower the compartments and the
inability that they develop to connect
with anything outside it
um
what i i don't mean i don't
want to i mean i think it would be
utopian to suggest that we should
dispense with existing formal education
uh to uh
and that everything should be like you
know working class auto deducts who in
fact had learned a great deal from and
who would put most academics to shame
they just you know they just i mean
david always used to say
the academics don't read his footnotes
the only people he hears from about them
are working class auto deducts who
actually read the footnotes the
academics are too busy to read the
footnotes they just want to get on the
glasses tomorrow
kid
unmute yourself you muted
uh
what i'm saying is that
i don't i want to see how
uh informal self-learning can be
uh can win more space in systems of
formal education
and as a teacher in such a system that's
all i can aspire to
as a teacher is to give give them that
space and
um uh
so
the idea is that you know that that we
don't get enough uh space for informal
and personal learning
in existing systems of
formal education
and there are various ways that i've
tried to deal with this which is
for example uh improvising it turns into
a kind of performance that they can
relate to more easily than
than
than some guy reading from a text
because he's he's just desperate to make
sure that he says every word he plans to
say
and you know they end up you know so
writing notes and and there's no human
connection at all in most lectures
especially you know i remember
when i was at goldsmiths you know i used
to improvise my lectures and and i would
put up a a powerpoint
no i didn't have a problem uh and once i
just this girl on the front row suddenly
jumped up and stuck her hand up and she
said i get it i guess it instead of us
just copying down the points in a
powerpoint we have to listen to you and
figure out what you're saying
it was brilliant i mean you know it's
like
confirmation of a lifetime's effort
but in the lectures themselves i never
just teach the books
i teach the people who wrote the books
their life history their politics the
historical circumstances because you
know i think you know we can't just say
go and read you know chapter one of
capital
you know we have to
i mean there's not i mean you know a kid
who's 18 can't connect with that book
as being something like himself
you know so
so but i think if you say you know well
max babel was doing this and this was
the situation and so on and at least he
didn't begin to think that this person
was not as alien to me as i thought and
maybe you know i could do something like
that myself
i mean you gotta that was
so
i think what
what i'm trying to say is that
that we can
and i mean my main i used to tell them
you know look if you've read the same
paragraph three times ditch the book
because you can't make sense of it
read something that you like or that you
can it seems
more readily accessible to you
uh because i believe you know that
that our history of life and the reading
you know
uh is essential to the sense that we can
make of any given book
in fact i think that reading is more
creative than writing although we're
told instantly to defer
ever always to defer to writers
because writers repeat themselves they
get into a groove and and don't get out
of it
and but every reader who reads what
they've written
brings an entirely different personal
history of experience and reading to
that text
and it's through
how readers interpret text that culture
evolves
you know i mean sometimes the readers
are themselves writers and we can see
you know that that but that you know
what we've got to think of is a system
of education
in which people understand that they are
the agents of their own education and
what they've done so far
uh uh will affect what they can read i
mean you know the two most important
people
in my life apart from clr james who i
met very late were marx and most as they
were in some sense for david also
uh
but you know i i read mark's the chat
try to read capital volume one four
times between the ages of 19 and 35
and i only managed to get the message i
think it's a very difficult book
actually because he's playing all kinds
of political games in it that most
ordinary readers wouldn't possibly
figure out
but they uh
i i the next weekend i read moses the
gifts that i also couldn't make any
sense off
and i read it through my knowledge
remarks and wrote 25 pages of notes in
the weekend and the two have been joined
that they hit for me for the rest of my
life
now you know so
these personal histories of reading
affect what you can get something else
of and
but people you know teachers say you're
gonna read this this week you know write
an essay on it
and somebody finds they can't really
make much sense of it and they
uh
you know they feel a failure and i say
look you know
you know keep it loose you know
if you can't make headway with this
you're not ready for it there will be
another time it's not your fault
but find something you know that you can
connect with
okay and
so
uh i in the book i offer my own
experience uh
and what i've learned about the world
in the hope that it could be
a practical basis for learning and
living
in ways that are
you know individual
[Music]
people's own way when i re the only book
i've written like it was the memory bank
and and and
i mean i ha i i actually have a an audio
i mean uh
an essay on the back burner called death
of the audience which is uh
a riposte to roland barth's death of the
author
i don't believe in the death of the
author but i certainly believe in the
death of the audience you can't create
many more it's like
you know cable tv you know you guys
can't just say well i know that all my
neighbors would have watched coronation
street tonight
so you know my my my uh
you know my
uh
i hope this always happens and now it's
happened with about 10 seconds to go i i
i lost the threat
um
but
[Music]
okay so um
this is why i think that you know we
have to give far more prominence to
self-learning
i think that the digital revolution even
though it it has been it's organized by
big tech who need to be subjected to
anti-trust legislation like rockefeller
and itnt
nevertheless as a medium it is universal
i mean uh and and
and the collapse of
time and space constraints on social
interaction
you know make it
something that we can participate in
with a sense of being an agent more than
just a recipient or a consumer
[Music]
and
that's
that's really the message i hope to
communicate in my book
all right
so
thank you so much i was uh curious if we
could maybe now if you could answer
several questions and if there are some
comments and they are most welcome
and
thank you for this kind of
introduction and
i was just curiosity maybe i could pose
the first question i am really
kind of enthralled by this notion of
lifelong self-learning
and
i remember being in boston
and encountering mel king who is an
activist
and mel king
is a self-taught activist let's say he
comes from
from civil rights fights and so on so
forth
and the tenth city in boston
and
when he was giving a talk
and together with certain people from
the field of visual arts and
activists
he was
speaking about the same issues that
these very educated let's say western
people in a very kind of
authentic way because he had gained that
knowledge from his practice so um
we recently hear a lot
of also people suggesting that we should
kind of re-educate ourselves or we
should
unlearn certain things do you believe
that we can unlearn or maybe this like
self-learning is a way how you could
construct an alternative kind of puzzle
or past
rather than um just
kind of i'm sorry there's a background
noise someone has switched on the
microphone
it just disturbs me a bit okay sorry
okay
uh
yeah so uh
how how would you say like what are the
possibilities how how can we we get to
this informal self learning is it the
the more kind of experiential path or or
or can you realize it also if you are
within the academic setting
um
so could you maybe elaborate a little i
i understood how you it's it's very
clear how you illustrate that in the
book but if we think about the the
younger generations today like what what
what could you suggest let's say because
sometimes the academy as you said it is
exactly the place where
any kind of enthusiasm
sort of ends rather than
well
i mean my i mean like vico and rousseau
i believe that
the adults are the problem you know and
that not the children i mean the
the i mean uh rousseau says at one stage
that
um
you know that the the bourgeoisie and
the aristocracy want their children to
grow up as fast as possible
uh they don't really want them to be
children at all and uh
and he said but you know they need the
time to develop in their own way
you know what they learn in the
playground on their own account is worth
far more to their development than what
they learn in the classroom
uh you know i i i
you know i i i've been betting all my
life and
and it's been a major part of my
self-education i mean i started when i
was 12
betting on the horses
and uh and now you know i have half a
million pounds riding on the world
markets
for finance
and you know i spend most of my time
staring at the foreign exchange rates uh
tables of the financial times but i i
can tell you that i learn more about the
world economy by risking my own money
than by anything that i read
and
so but this is an attitude i think i
developed very early
and uh uh
andrews mentioned you know do i mean
one thing i believe is you know you've
got to get rid of negation in your
thinking certainly as a method of
escaping from these
problems any time any and if you start
by negating something what you're
negating becomes part of how you
contrive
what you what you think of as positive
so i never lecture on what i don't like
i only lecture on stuff that i can
you know be enthusiastic about because i
want these uh students to feel that it's
possible to be
you know to be enthusiastic about a dead
book
uh so
uh so i i mean i
i have a uh i have a
a section of a chapter called resisting
alienation because i believe that
another way of expressing
uh what i mean
is that you know resisting uh alienation
has to be more powerful than alienation
itself
and there are ways of getting you know
the means of resisting alienation which
include you know reading marks
but uh
but i think the important thing is to
recognize
always that
uh
you know yes i mean it's important to
understand what you'll get why you don't
like what you're guessing
but you shouldn't you know consciously
seek to negate it to try to develop some
other way because
i mean it really is a terrible thing i
mean people don't understand
how and i really think it affects the
west
i mean you know i mean if you want to
find you know free marketeers in this
society
you'll find people on the left upholding
it more than anybody else because they
think that's what they have to negate
but you know there isn't any such thing
as a free market out there
it's just an ideological slogan of the
capital is
but the law of left people you know left
wingers think they have to build a
solidarity economy or you know
a non-capitalized alternative or
whatever you know that is is
you know it it i think the last is as as
especially since the millennium has
more or less committed suicide
it certainly has almost no
palpable uh political agenda that makes
a difference to anything
you know i mean look at i had to live in
france you know three of the
you know uh
three of the candidates for the
presidency were xenophobic ultracrass
there was no
you know anyway so that's it that's
because i can i pose a question yeah
what
how could you break down
marx's either his life or his
works
based on that distinction you just drew
between the negation because and maybe
this is only
what's
happened in the last 20 years like
you're saying but don't we always think
of marx and his thought as a negation of
capitalism i mean
his his work was called capital so i
would be so curious to see you connect
um
marks
the reason why it took me four
tries over 17 years to understand
capital volume one was chapter one
now if you read uh grundrissa which he
wrote for himself
he already trashes all these liberal
theories and especially their theories
of money
and then he starts out
in the uh in chapter one
uh
making out somehow that adam smith was
right you know he actually uses adam
smith's theory of money as a launching
pad for his own
discussion of money
and the reason he's doing this is he
what he doesn't want to say just you're
all wrong
he wants to he wants to show
by agreeing in a limited way with
liberal theories of money because he
isn't entirely against liberalism and
and capitalism he wants to show
you know that uh
he can turn those premises
into a recipe for revolution
and it's so i mean this is this is a
very english cultural
phenomenon it's why you know
in in parliament people start talking
about my uh
uh oh let me not talk about when i write
a reference or
you know i mean you know i i say
something negative about the person uh
that uh
that
that i want to support
so that people will think that i'm an
honest broker when i praise him to the
skies i mean
there is a dialectic you know you don't
start out by rejecting everything
i don't think i think the marxist book
is very difficult to understand because
of the point that i've made
and that's why i couldn't understand it
you know brundlister is a lot more
accessible
because he wrote it to himself but he
had a particular agenda
to try and demonstrate
that uh
uh
the liberal political economy even if
you took it
as you know
possibly you know just if you just
accepted some of its major principles
leads
inevitably according to his logic and
exposition
to the overthrow of liberal political
economy
by the working class
i mean you know the the that's i don't
know i mean i think the man has
disappeared oh there he is yeah
sorry i mean if you want to come back i
mean i
i i look this is personal i don't claim
that everybody has to work the same way
but i i think why you know you know
there's a
a novel by ian foster where the guy says
life is short saved you know
and your life is too short why waste
your time proving that someone is a
i mean you know i mean just show me what
you think i need to know to make some
progress
and that may include you know
understanding
you know what you know our thought is
based on but not necessarily trashing it
yeah go ahead zara oh thanks
hi so thank you so much this has been
great um unfortunately we came out a
little bit later so you might have
covered this already but um we're both
high school seniors and we were just
kind of curious about how you would
suggest
um
younger students like organize and start
like doing the work around readings and
like i know you talk about like
individual learning and like
self-exploration but how would you
suggest like creating a sense of
community
around like this i guess more radical
thought practice
just because i feel like that's a
definitely a very individualized
experience and like i don't know if
that's necessarily plagued like
capitalist isolation
um strategies so we were just kind of
wondering about that well i mean look i
mean
i mean i have collaborated in writing
books with seven people
i formed uh an open anthropology
cooperative
that had 22 000 members which is 50
more than the american anthropological
association
i mean i you know i i i
everywhere i've been you know i've i've
given you know soirees to students so
that we could you know have a drink and
and talk things over
uh uh
you know i've read capital yale with uh
with uh you know with with a group of
people who wanted to do that and you
know
i mean i mean the thing is that the
social context
of how we make advance
is uh important but i think what
matters mean i i'm sorry i have to
disappoint you because
unfortunately they only hand out brains
once at a time
and almost everything you think is
formed in between your ears
and you should be aware that that's the
most
important aspect of your education not
finding people to read with or to find
some you know i mean
if you find a group of people i mean
what what i say in my book is that
is that
how students learn is in their informal
conversations and drinking into the
small hours of the morning not in the
lecture room
you learn more in the free you know
free-floating exchanges with people you
know and why
than you do in any kind so if you say
you know i need a class
that i have made you know in order to do
this
that means you downgrade these things
which are actually more important which
are the you know not just what you do by
yourself but the
the the the many informal ways that you
have of of of of learning from people of
your age and you know i mean that's how
people that's what that's what he meant
when he's you know rousseau said you you
know kids learn more from the playground
and what they do there on their own
terms than they do when some also
appointed by the church tries to turn
them into
uh citizens
you know you know so and i mean i i i
mean to me the greatest thing that
happened in my life
was the digital revolution i've been a
very act i mean almost everything that i
do now
all my ways of learning communication so
on is done on that i mean the scope for
for interaction and sharing
uh
in so many specialized and and common
ways is it's not you know the only
problem is we have to
you know do it through
organizations that believe command and
control capitalism is still the best way
of organizing the internet you know
so but you have you can find ways around
that i mean i just have
an email address system with about a
thousand people in it that i like
and if i come up with something i i get
onto one or two of them and say what do
you think
uh you know we live in a in a world
where time and space
uh distance has collapsed
uh and we you know we can talk to
anybody we like we don't have to be i
mean i have a daughter
two daughters actually
and you know she she
she actually
was a hollywood producer who helped to
launch blu-ray for sonny
but now then she became a a yoga teacher
and now she wants to become a creative
writer and she's thinking about and so
she was discussing with me you know how
can i become a creative writer
and she said you know
i need to find you know a group of
people in the neighborhood who i should
talk about creative writing with
well maybe creative writing is alone
activity and suits my case and maybe
there are other things you cannot where
you you know you learn best by sharing
with people who would help you do
together what you want to do
i mean i understand that
uh but but you know i keep saying you
know it's the kids the kids you know i
have another daughter with generation
zeb
and uh
i love these girls you know
i mean you know she went to the best uh
uh
we say in in france
and
i mean these kids the generations their
kids they're so much better than the
millennials
never mind
the baby boomers and all the rest of it
i mean they're hard working they're
politically in a very focused way
they're enthusiasts you know they're
digitally
tremendous
and you know creative and and
and they get home say you know i mean my
daughter this this this teenager you
know went all day to greece
and you know with her class and i said
well what did you think of greece and
she said oh i loved my companions
you know i mean she said i mean the
biggest thing in her life is whether
she's got a good social life
but at the same time she knows you know
she's gonna organize what she does by
herself and and
take it seriously i i really believe
based on my experience of these kids
in paris
that generation said is the only
possible salvation for the planet
and you need to get rid of us
first
or just do something that
you know i mean you know
i mean you know aggressive phone
thunderbird is is is is a model
you know i mean
so so
i mean i i i i know you've been
bombarded since you were a baby with the
idea that you're incompetent
and that you only be incompetent when
you've got a phd you only be competent
when you've got a phd or something and
that and getting that you know
uh subjects you to coercive arseholes
all the way
you know i mean i that the thing is you
you know
i believe and i'm not making this isn't
a joke
i mean i'm sure there are other
you know i mean but you know fanon
uh
you know knew i mean he got into the
algerian war and he saw what people were
doing in the
anti-colonial struggle and he realized
that these people had a power
that was be was consistently denied them
by racist colonialism
and you have to find your power on who
you want to do it with
i'm sorry it sounds a bit
bit tried but uh
that's
my belief
thank you so much we have to go but this
has been wonderful thank you
thank you bye
[Music]
okay thank you steve you wanted to you
were saying something before
well i see that michael's hand is is up
so um let me see if there are other
hands
uh michael would you like to
ask a question
yeah sure this just
is actually very similar to the previous
question so but like i wanted to ask it
about
learning traditions where you use the
word auto didact
um and what or that came up in this you
know whether people learn which is
sometimes people say oh autodynamic
you're learning all by yourself will you
really learn something and then
universities are there as this big
tradition to learn many some of us are
partially in that but this group is
actually a quite a a unique learning
experience because
it does it comes all kinds of people
from different backgrounds and stuff
like that
um but i wanted to also throw out other
traditions like you know the the cynical
unionist movement political traditions
the anti-imperialist movement that you
talked about in the 20th century as as
those
and
um what what do you think in terms of um
uh whether or not
uh what what are the benefits of of
being connected in some way to a
tradition
versus being an auto dive act and how do
you be both an auto didact
first of all
i mean i use terms like first of all i
mentioned also that that's uh
that i knew
i didn't say where but it was basically
northern working class
english
unionists
marxists and so on when i talk about
also do that i mean somebody who feels
that he's got to read a lot in order to
you know make progress as well as being
part of a union and and the left-wing
political party and so on and so forth
you know so
i mean i i mean everything changed for
me
uh
after i went to jamaica for two years in
the late 80s and met c.r james not there
but
because i was there
and i was with him for three years
before he died in 1989
and
i mean he
he was in fact an auto did that i mean
he i mean he went to this post school in
trinidad and the idea was he was very
clever and he played cricket well and
and and he was supposed to go to london
uh you know get a degree and become a
doctor or a lawyer and he rejected that
and uh started uh
and and started writing fiction and
sports uh reporting and joining the
beacon circle and
and so on so that he uh
when he got to london he was 32 years
old he never realized him by marx
uh
but he was lucky he went to a place in
lancashire called nelson where
uh uh
he went to join um
uh
leary constantine who was the prefer the
the the the the cricket professional at
a small lancashire town called nelson
which was known as little moscow because
almost everybody in it was a communist
uh
and so because of if marx's uh local
culture
he read his first
marx's book and he was really lucky
because he read trotsky's russian
revolution rather than some of the other
things
that could have sunk him and in fact his
book the black jacobins
uses the triad of
lenin uh trotsky and spelling to
to
organize that anyway
and he was a cricket reporter for the
guardian while he was doing that
um so uh
i mean the the
well i was with him in brixton in the
last years of his life
and young
uh
young black activists would come to see
him in ones and twos and
and they would say you know tell me oh
guru you know what i should do and he
says
well you know i mean the two you could
start a newspaper
um
you know maybe only two pages and then
you might find somebody else with
another two-page newspaper and you can
uh do that but the thing that's
important is that you should write about
what you know well
you mustn't think you've got to join
you know arcane political theories and
disputes
that you don't so
uh
i mean he used to tell his story quite
often
[Music]
and he would tell people
frequently you know you have to go away
and find out who you are what you know
and uh
and do that because you know certainly
to start with
and
so you know i
i mean i i i
he
he taught me
by example
you know and and not you know in any
organized way
uh
and in fact you know first of all i mean
that's a another one the the point
i mean you know
i was very very lucky i was 50 at the
time
and uh
and i was very lucky to find him at a
time when things were changing imagine
you know the
the berlin wall and the
uh
the collapse of the soviet union and all
this kind of thing
and uh
so it was um
i mean you know
i mean he used to tell me you know you
have to
follow your own notes in these things
you know you have to be you know in
charge of your own development and your
own policies of course you've got to do
it with other people
uh so uh
and you know this was the turning point
of my life
i mean you know i mean i i i became
what i am now
really only then and before then i just
couldn't find anything with in the world
to
to connect with or how
i just you know
uh uh
but you know the the the this
going to jamaica and and
and and staying with him in the last
years of his life
helped me to discover a certain
style of politics
but it it's not you know it's not based
on rejecting
uh
rejecting you know formal political
associations
i mean
i mean you know i
as as i think andres mentioned you know
i've lived in
in in 24 countries
i'm a nomad i mean i
i had this principle that
if he doesn't work here i'm going to
move on i'm not going to adapt to it or
put up with it
and you know my nominees was the means
of being free
but in the process you know i i learned
a great deal from people like him
but i always knew that i was a loner
uh you know and and and
in the scene i i mean you know i mean i
went to manchester grammar school for
god's sake
i got a scholarship to st john's college
cambridge
i mean you know but but uh you know
through being with cll for those three
years i was able to
uh
devise
a path for myself which is based on
acknowledging that i wanted to be a
writer more than anything else and
that's not a collective
thing
but it's out of tremendous respect for
all the people that i met and work with
on the way
uh i was wondering if there are some
other questions
or comments
nika i saw you had a question
in the chat i'd i'd love to hear that
yes um so my question is uh reference to
the interview that
um i took from keith hart
10 years ago it was published it
probably was
uh maybe 12 years ago when
i met you in your paris apartment and it
was an interview in which you said that
the war in europe
is gonna happen once and this will last
for at least thirty can you say that
again
um
the war in europe
in europe yeah i just wanted to ask you
what do if you will be willing to
comment on the current situation that
you know
people are hesitated to talk about or
commenting
outside of the big media what do you
want me to comment about
um
it's uh
i had a problems to publish this
interview because uh
uh 10 years ago it seems totally insane
that you were saying but now it's really
uh you can read it as like so clear
it's it's almost like a news
that
was just waiting to happen
yeah well i mean
meeting ciara james was was
and you know the turning point in my
life and i've not looked back since
um
but then before that i was just a drone
really a lot of the time trying try or
or a gambler or whatever
uh
but i i i think it's a bit hard to
summarize
i mean you have
maybe you should
say where you have now published it
um actually it was published only in
russian
i translated it into english and now oh
but but the english version has just
been
yeah you edited that recently so it was
published in academia um
i can send it to the channel yeah no and
look i mean
it's just that the question isn't
focused enough
and
i don't want to focus it i just want you
to lose comments you want me to do a
final riff about the revolution
i mean
unfortunately i felt i didn't have time
i haven't had a section on a
periodization of the last 250 years
you know which was
you know 1775
to 1815 war and revolution
1815 to 1860 industrial capitalism born
1860s to
70s
and so on and so forth
um
[Music]
but it ended with
uh
i mean you know
what i i okay i see what i'm trying to
say is that the one message that i'm
getting across
is we need to be personal and engaged
but we also have to have a framework of
history to work within
and uh and i put a lot of effort into
that and you know so that um
[Music]
and i don't think i can summarize it now
um but it ends with me you know
the
the i mean i'll just give you the
headlines not the dates which are
war and revolution
industrial capitalism born
national capitalism born
first phase of uh
financial imperialism
from
1870s to the first world war
uh 30 years of war from 1914 to 1945
then
a period of about 30 years after 1945
when there was in my view a world
revolution
uh involving not just the western
industrial societies
but
the the soviet bloc and
the newly emergent uh
former colonies
and then you know from 1980 we're in
another 40-year block of financial
imperialism
uh
it ends
in
1920 in 2022
it ends
when
you know uh uh
uh
i'm sorry and and and
i just lost the name of the guy who runs
the soviet union
i mean come on
give me his name please
vote in right i mean this happens when
i've been talking for too long
so so i mean
you know putin has launched a new era
and i think it's the next phase of war
and revolution
i mean uh uh you know i i don't see any
way out of it i mean
i think the last 40 years uh
have been uh uh
a waste and and and and
you know and that
that that you know a major war is about
i mean i've i've always believed that uh
the the the
the people made so much from the period
after 1945 for 70 years that so many
people gained so much
and they haven't lost much of it yet
um
that you know that i can't predict when
and how the next war will occur but i
think it is in the process of occurring
now
and uh you know but i i based that
on an analysis of the last 250 years
history of war and politics and
capitalism which i can hardly summarize
here
but um
yes i i mean i i i i've been
feeling for some time you know that
the only the you know world war iii is
going to sort us out and they remain we
may not survive in
uh but i think that's what is happening
now yeah
so um
yeah i mean
but i mean it just comes across you
can't you can't ask me a question of
what do you think about you know the end
of the world
i mean
but the thing is that i've been thinking
about the end of the world for
30 years
and it began you know with the fall of
the berlin wall
and
you know i
i mean you know i i i
you know that i i'm sorry i mean it's
it's it becomes very self-indulgent
maybe it always was my talk today but
you know i i believe that we can't just
say what we think without a historical
framework for it
and one that is based on all the good
advice and and previous work that has
been done by marx and trotsky and canes
and
and all these other guys we have to
immerse ourselves in that and i have
but i only did it after meeting james
you know i mean james was the catalyst
that made me realize you know that i had
to rethink my priorities and
and at the time you know that we were
living in from 1989 to 1994
you know where with with the collapse of
the soviet empire and
uh
the rise of the world wide web and
uh all the other uh uh amazing things
that took place between uh
in that five year period you know that
that was the form i mean before that i
couldn't really believe
that i was uh
i could connect with what was changing
the world and indeed i didn't think the
world was changing very much
and uh
but now you know
i feel you know i mean
i mean my favorite thinker
i long chalk his lennon
i mean you've got to go back to lenny
there's nobody in his class
that you know that
that can help us think about how we're
going to deal with the war and
revolutions that's coming up
uh
you know
as you see i'm starting to sound like
some kind of gypsy fortune tower
i think i better quit while i'm still
ahead
if i am
no but i i want to thank you very i mean
i i'm terribly pleased to have had an
opportunity
to talk with you and to listen to you
but not much
i've been talking too much and
i i i i'm and
you know i i don't believe that
i think that i you know i always say you
know the
that i don't think i'm jesus i could be
john the baptist
you know the guy who was the warm-up act
for the big time politician
i think i'm the warmer back for the big
time politician and i don't know who
that is yes
but the people who have helped me to see
that are
above all else clr james and
reading the history of pran-africanism
and gandhi
you know that's that's i mean i think we
we need to be able to place our struggle
in a
an effective political framework
uh historical framework and
and that's what i've spent the last 30
40 years trying to do
but it's not easy to
i mean you know i don't think this uh
current conflict is gonna go away
mean i don't think
i don't think putin is going to fold
and
[Music]
and i also think that you know
the the west you know the americans
europe and so on
uh terminally
uh incompetent and
and and
corrupted
uh you know i mean i
i mean i if i was living in in india or
russia
or china you know i would say well we've
got these guys on the run they don't
know what to do because
they're run by capitalists
without even decent politicians to hold
them in check
you know i i i mean i
i've been prepared you know i i
i want to play a part in this
and i think a lot of what i've been
writing since you
met me
has been
prolly governor to you know how can we
develop knowledge and thinking that will
give us a chance in the next big war
and this is it we're in it
right so should we uh should we get some
other questions or or should we end on
on this or maybe
well you're the chair
yeah i wouldn't
it's better always to end with the
apocalypse
uh
yeah it might be i i just wanted to uh
one curiosity brought to benjamin in in
one of his writings he mentions
uh
that he was looking for a positive
dialectic of a question so
maybe we can like it's an open question
so can we think about what could be the
positive dialectic like of your book and
of your proposals
um
i mean i don't have to go to walter
benjamin
and i can go to marx
with positive dialectic you know the the
that
there are times when the dialectic
develops
and then it starts kind of
blending into itself and becoming kind
of nondescript
and out of that
often a positive dialectic emerges
now you know i mean i don't think it's
possible for me to say what would be the
positive dialectic that will emerge from
the mess that we're in
but all that you know i i do believe you
know that it's a serious task
as a political educator to show people
how they got to this point
and and leave to other people to say
where we're going to take it from here
because i'm 80 next year come on
i mean the idea that i'm gonna be the
next mars you know it's ridiculous
you know so so
uh i mean you know the fact is i got
several terminal diseases i probably
won't last another two or three years
anyway
but but and i'm not joking about that i
wouldn't joke about my own death
um
so i mean
next week
thank you kate for
for having shared your time
i've ended it on another down point i
mean the point is positive dialectics
come out of the death of the previous
dialectic
and i say we're in a period of
negative dialectic
and that you know that it's up to you
especially the younger ones of you to
to immerse yourself actively and
theoretically in
and you will understand what's happening
a lot better in two or three years than
you do now
and you know everything you're doing now
is a preparation for it
i mean i spent 50 years as a scholar
you know
and it was only you know when i got to
50 i suddenly realized there was a
political point i couldn't find the
politics in my life until
you know the berlin wall fell down
yeah thank you
run you
yes sorry
it was a wonderful
uh way to to to to close uh this talk
thank you so much for
having shared your time and your
precious thoughts with us and it was
really
a wonderful
meeting
shall we
close it nika here
thank you so much
and i just want to point out that
despite your disagreement with david we
did have a wonderful dinner together in
portobello road
so
everything was solved
yeah
thank you thank you for coming yeah and
i hope your book will be like really
wide read
we always come back to
david institute it's a lottery
i you know one of the things that i've
written i say yeah
i'm gonna die unknown and 200 years from
now
a mexican adolescent
will
read something i wrote and think that
that's his life that his ideas come from
me
even though they don't and i'll become
world famous because of him
[Laughter]
that's the game we're in
i mean i hope you know
i i think it's a good book
we'll see
thank you everyone thank you
thank you so much for coming
yeah
i always end up spoiling it at the end
you know no
thank you i'm i'm off to go find a
positive dialectic
yeah well yeah
yeah
the positive dialectic is
when i you know i found one in
gen zed
uh first class high school students
i mean i can believe in them if i can't
believe in me
[Music]
fantastic
thank you thank you keith
okay so much bye